# awesome methylation with expression
Methylation :tw-1f493: Expression

1. (Integrated single-cell RNA-seq and DNA methylation reveal the effects of air pollution in patients with recurrent spontaneous abortion)[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9400245/] (code)[] (data)[]
> We identified 98 DEGs with aberrant methylation by overlapping the RRBS and RNA-seq data. 
> A total of 4133 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) targeting 3526 differentially methylated genes (DMGs) were identified (P < 0.05 and |t|> 2.5), of which 1944 DMRs targeting 1645 DMGs showed hypermethylation, whereas 2187 DMRs targeting 1881 DMGs were hypomethylated in RSA compared to the controls
> A total of 928 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified, including 380 downregulated DEGs and 548 upregulated DEGs.
> To explore how methylation affects expression, we used an integrated analysis strategy. After integrating methylomes and transcriptomes, ninety-eight DEGs with abnormal methylation were identified, comprising fifty-five hypomethyl-upregulated DEGs and forty-three hypermethyl-downregulated DEGs (Fig. 3A). According to the literature and enrichment analysis, six genes (ADAM12, FLT1, DLX3, IGF2BP1, F13A1, and FSTL3) were screened and verified by qRT-PCR. The qRT-PCR validation was performed in 16 controls and 16 patients with RSA. As shown in Fig. 3B, the expression levels of FLT1 and IGF2BP1 in the decidua were significantly higher in patients with RSA than in controls. Subsequently, a pyrosequencing assay was performed on two genes (FLT1 and IGF2BP1). We identified that DNA methylation levels of seven CpG sites in the IGF2BP1 promoter region in the decidua were significantly different between the patients with RSA and controls (Fig. 3C, Additional file 1: Table 3), while no CpG sites in the FLT1 promoter showed a statistical difference (Fig. 3D). Next, we performed receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis to examine the potential diagnostic value of methylation of IGF2BP1 in distinguishing patients with RSA and controls, indicating that the methylation level of IGF2BP1 has considerable potential as a diagnostic biomarker (Additional file 6: Fig. 4A). Interestingly, IGF2BP1 was also observed in 369 upregulated DEGs of scRNA-seq and was highly expressed in dM1 and dNK1 (Additional file 6: Fig. 4B). Collectively, these findings illustrated the abnormal methylation and expression level of IGF2BP1 may relate with RSA.
2. (Identification of Subtypes of Barrett’s Esophagus and Esophageal Adenocarcinoma Based on DNA Methylation Profiles and Integration of Transcriptome and Genome Data)[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7305027/] (code)[] (data:Methylation data is accessible from European Genome-phenome Archive under accession numbers EGAD00010001822, EGAD00010001838 and EGAD00010001834.)[]
> We analyzed methylation profiles of all BE and EAC tissues and assigned them to subgroups using non-negative matrix factorization with k-means clustering. Data from whole-genome sequencing and transcriptome studies were then incorporated; we performed integrative methylation and RNA-seq analyses to identify genes that were suppressed with increased methylation in promoter regions.
> For assessing which genes undergo transcriptional repression under the influence of gaining methylation in promoter regions, we performed integrative methylation and RNA-seq analysis. For this analysis, we considered samples for which both RNA-seq and methylation were available. For each gene, we identified all probes located 1500 bp both up and downstream from the transcription start site (TSS). We selectively removed all CpG sites that were methylated in normal tissues (mean β-value >0.2). Methylation data was then dichotomised using β-value of ≥0.3 as a threshold (as used in TCGA studies13, 31) for positive DNA methylation, and discarded CpG sites methylated in fewer than 10% of samples. For each probe/gene pair, we then applied the following conditions: 1) categorized samples as either methylated (β ≥0.3) or unmethylated (β <0.3); 2) Compare expression in the methylated and unmethylated groups using the Mann-Whitney test; 3) Compute the correlation between methylation beta and expression TPM. We labelled each individual tumour sample as epigenetically silenced for a specific probe/gene pair selected above if for the probes there is a difference in beta (>0.2) between two groups, difference in distribution of expression of (adjusted p-value < 0.05) and negative correlation between methylation and expression (r < -0.1, adjusted p-value < 0.05). Only genes with multiple probes were considered for this analysis and a sample considered as epigenetically silenced if more than thirty percent of probes for the corresponding gene was also labelled as epigenetically silenced.
> We used ELMER32 for understanding which transcription factors are regulated upon perturbations from regulatory regions. Briefly, this method is based on initially identifying differentially methylated distal probes and predicting enriched motifs across them. Methylation levels from motif associated probes are then correlated with expression levels of transcription factor and ranked for any significant associations. We performed supervised analysis where each subtype was compared with others. On doing so we did not find significant results for most of the comparisons except for one, that between Subtype 2 and Subtype 3.
> We also observe that a few immune regulators (BLNK, CD40, VAV3, IRS2) are also affected by methylation.

3. (Genome-wide DNA methylation and RNA expression differences correlate with invasiveness in melanoma cell lines)[https://www.futuremedicine.com/doi/full/10.2217/epi-2020-0440?rfr_dat=cr_pub++0pubmed&url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori%3Arid%3Acrossref.org] (data:GSE153595)[]
> Integration of methylome & transcriptome data: mapping of ERV1 DMFs with DEGs & lncRNAs.To identify the effect of ERV1 hypomethylation on expression, the authors mapped the RRBS fragments overlapping with ERV1 to differentially expressed protein-coding genes, lncRNAs and pseudogenes. 
> To determine the association between gene expression and DNA methylation, DEGs (439 genes) were compared with DMFs (49 RRBS fragments). Overlaps based on the closest genes to the DMFs revealed six common genes with differential methylation and differential expression (Table 1). The overlapping DMFs were identified in the promoter region (two DMFs) as well as in the intronic region (six DMFs). 
> Validation of expression of selected genes using qRT-PCR

4. ***(Identification of epigenetic modulators in human breast cancer by integrated analysis of DNA methylation and RNA-Seq data)[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6291302/] 
> flow chart of the computational pipeline for identifying modulator genes that are involved in dysregulated DNA methylation in breast cancer. In the first data preprocessing step, Illumina 450K methylation microarray intensities of both breast tumors and normal tissues are normalized; the batch effect is removed, and the effect of unknown and unmeasured variables is also removed with surrogate variable analysis (SVA). In the second step, DMRs in tumors relative to normal tissues are detected. In the third step, co-regulated DMRs are determined with hierarchical clustering, and the motifs of DNA binding proteins that are significantly enriched in each cluster of DMRs are identified. In the fourth step, gene expression levels of those proteins whose binding motifs are enriched in DMRs are correlated with the DNA methylation, and based on such correlation, methylation modulator genes for DMRs are determined. Finally, network analysis is performed to find network modules connected to modulator genes. More detailed description of each step is given in the following.
> (flowgraph)[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6291302/figure/F0006/]

5. ***(An integrative analysis of DNA methylation and RNA-Seq data for human heart, kidney and liver)[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3287572/]
> Next, we wanted to determine to what degree the gene expression differences among tissues are affected by epigenetic changes. We used cuffdiff to find expression variation (in FPKM) between tissues and then associated the selected genes with their methylation levels in HumanMethylation27 array. In total, we selected 1296 genes that were differentially expressed between any pair of the three tissues and that exist in HumanMethylatin27 array. We further looked at whether these 1296 genes showed DNA methylation variation between tissues as well. Unpaired t test was used to detect the methylation differences among tissues and the results are summarized in Figure ​Figure3.3
>  The distance of each CpG markers to the transcriptional start site (TSS) was used a covariate to fit into a linear model, but it was not identified as a confounding factor to influence gene expression. In short, the majority of differentially expressed genes showed significant changes in DNA methylation, implying DNA methylation plays an important role in mediating tissue differentiation.

6. (Identification of DNA methylation-regulated differentially expressed genes in RA by integrated analysis of DNA methylation and RNA-Seq data )[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9588210/]




